[Music]
in August of 1945 as the world
celebrates the end of the Second World
War
out in the Pacific the Americans make a
puzzling discovery the US Navy has
intercepted a Japanese submarine and
it's unlike anything they've seen before
its scale is baffling but not only is it
the world's largest submarine it's an
entirely new kind of weapon a submarine
that can launch torpedo dive bombers the
Americans have just stumbled across
Japan's secret underwater aircraft
carriers and soon they'll uncover a
sinister plan that could have changed
the course of the war
[Music]
Japan's a surprise attack on Pearl
Harbor in December of 1941 is an event
that galvanizes a nation pulling a
reluctant America into the Second World
War the untroubled and dastardly attack
by Japan a day after the devastating
attack the United States declares war on
Japan and the nation quickly mobilizes
firing up its enormous industrial might
to crank out ships tanks and aircraft at
a rate that'll soon bury Japan's
military for the Americans Pearl Harbor
was a senseless and cowardly provocation
but for the Japanese the attack was
something entirely different a
calculated gamble in a longshot attempt
at actually trying to avoid a full-scale
war with the United States because as
the Empire of Japan continued its
ruthless conquest in Asia the Japanese
were convinced that it was only a matter
of time before the u.s. intervened and
the architect behind the Pearl Harbor
attack Japanese Admiral Yamamoto
was aiming to knock out much of the US
Pacific Fleet in one decisive blow as a
way to keep the United States out of the
Pacific for at least another six months
and perhaps even forcing the Americans
into negotiating a truce but Imperial
Japan grossly underestimated America's
resolve and in the aftermath Yamamoto
knew America's military might would soon
overwhelm Japan's now faced with a war
he cannot win Yamamoto devises another
strategy to make America reconsider a
drawn-out war in the Pacific
he'll bring the war directly to
America's cities but with the United
States now on guard for Japanese forces
Yamamoto will need a truly stealthy
weapon to reach the United States a
weapon the Americans would never suspect
the concept of launching aircraft from a
submarine originated before the Second
World War but these earlier attempts
were experimental trials usually
involving a single lightweight
reconnaissance plane
what Yamamoto had in mind was far more
ambitious a fleet of submarines that
could carry multiple attack aircraft and
strike fear into the enemy by launching
surprise attacks on cities only to
submerge and disappear again in March of
1942 Japanese engineers were handed the
enormous task of designing Yamamoto x'
secret weapon to start
Yamamoto's aircraft carrying subs would
need to be capable of launching
full-size torpedo dive bombers and
engineers would have to design a
catapult launch system and a mechanism
to recover the aircraft and bring them
back on board but making the Bombers fit
inside a submarine would be an even
bigger challenge with a typical World
War - IRRI dive bomber having a wingspan
of about 12 meters Engineers would also
need to design an entirely new dive
bomber one that could be folded up to
fit inside the subs hangar the
submarines would also need to be able to
reach any part of America's coastline
thousands of kilometers away and then
returned all the way back to Japan
without refueling or resupplying Anna
meant carrying nearly 2 million litres
of diesel fuel and enough supplies to
support a crew out at sea for months
Japan's secret underwater aircraft
carriers would be designated as the I
400 and they'd be enormous nearly twice
the length of a typical German u-boat to
support the weight of the hangar and to
keep the sub stable during carrier
operations engineers innovated a double
hull design essentially two hulls stuck
together it gave the mammoth eye 400
nearly three times the displacement of
even the largest American submarine and
the AI 400 was still a formidable
submarine in the conventional sense
armed with eight forward mounted torpedo
tubes in a matte
of deck gun and defend off enemy
aircraft three triple mounted
anti-aircraft guns in a fourth single
mounted gun on the sail but of course
the eye for hundreds primary weapons
where it's three torpedo dive bombers
[Music]
the element of surprise was an
underwater aircraft carriers greatest
advantage and as the AI 400 silently
approached its target its crew would
already begin preparing the aircraft
mechanics would start by running heated
oil through the aircraft's engines so
they would be warmed up and ready to
launch the mammoth submarine would
surface a few hundred kilometres from
its target and the race would be on to
get three farmers airborne each aircraft
would be rolled out from the hangar onto
the deck crews would then start the
engine unfold the wings and tail lock
floats into place and load armament one
by one the three aircraft would be
launched using a compressed air catapult
the whole process would take 30 minutes
after which the I 400 would dive back to
safety and silently wait for the Bombers
to return from their mission the torpedo
dive bombers were cutting-edge they were
designed specifically for the AI 400 and
could carry the largest bomb or torpedo
in Japan's naval Arsenal equipped with a
pair of floats the aircraft would land
alongside the submarine to be hoisted
back aboard using a collapsible
hydraulic crane the aircraft could also
be launched without floats for greater
range and performance but forcing the
pilots to ditch into the ocean after
their mission the IEEE 400 was a
brilliant design merging the stealth of
a submarine with the offensive strike
capability of an aircraft carrier but
Japan's new super weapon would make no
difference in the war
[Music]
on August the 15th 1945 after nearly
four years of brutal conflict and with
American forces closing in and the
bombing of Japanese cities Japan finally
surrendered and the Americans first
intercepted in I 402 off the coast of
Japan two weeks after the surrender and
at first they weren't exactly sure what
it was
the Japanese crews had thrown all of the
attack aircraft overboard and at first
the Americans believed that the I 400
was designed to carry cargo but they'd
soon unravel the submarines true purpose
and why Japan never used them in the war
to start many in Japan's Navy considered
Yamamoto's underwater aircraft carriers
to be a farce and the slow process of
launching aircraft in the middle of a
combat zone too dangerous for submarine
crews but resistance to the concept
would soon be the least of Yamamoto's
concerns because it took nearly a year
to design such an unconventional weapon
construction of the first I 400s only
began at the start of 1943 by then the
Japanese were already losing the war
after a crushing defeat in June of 1942
the Americans were pushing the Japanese
back across the Pacific and Japan was
running critically short on fuel and raw
materials delaying I 400 construction
even further when Yamamoto himself would
never live to see any of his submarines
completed in 1943 while on an inspection
tour through the South Pacific
Yamamoto's plane was downed by American
forces
what started as a plan to build a fleet
of 18 underwater aircraft carriers was
eventually whittled down to just five
and only three were ever completed the
first entering service in 1945 so late
in the war that Japan's military had
already all but collapsed launching
sneak attacks on American cities with a
handful of dive bombers would have been
pointless even a more strategic mission
to bomb the Panama Canal was abandoned
after Japanese command felt that it too
would have made little difference so
late in the war the only mission the
IEEE 400 would ever set out on was a
last-ditch effort to bomb American
forces as they amassed off a tiny
Pacific atoll but as the first I 400s
traveled to their targets Japan
surrendered finally ending the Second
World War
[Music]
aircraft carrier submarines had always
been a gamble a way to change odds so
stacked against Japan that only through
sheer ingenuity could the tables be
turned and had the sub arrived at the
start of the war it might have made a
difference but Japan's secret weapon
wasn't without compromise the process of
launching three aircraft was supposed to
take 30 minutes but rarely could it be
accomplished in less than 45 a dangerous
amount of time for such a large
submarine to be surfaced and the I 400s
bombers well sophisticated in their
design were rushed into service and
built from lower grade materials due to
shortages they were notoriously
unreliable rarely could all three get
airborne without some mechanical problem
and the enormous eye for hundreds depth
time critical for getting out of danger
was nearly double that of American
submarines even submerged it was still
vulnerable with a hall that was riveted
not welded it likely would have stood a
poorly against depth charges still the
Americans considered the eye 400 to be a
dangerous weapon especially in the wrong
hands and in 1946 with the Soviets
demanding to inspect the subs for
themselves
the Americans scuttled the I 400s off
the coast of Hawaii in Japan keeping
their exact wreckage locations secret
and closing the chapter on an ambitious
new kind of weapon that in a different
set of circumstances might have changed
the course of the war
this video originally appeared on nebula
a streaming site that I helped create
nebula is where you can watch mustard
videos before they're on YouTube without
any annoying advertisements or sponsor
messages it's also home to a growing
number of nebula originals
like real engineering's ongoing series
on the logistics of d-day long-form
documentaries by Wendover productions an
experimental content by your favorite
creators right now you can get nebula
for free when you sign up for curiosity
stream with curiosity stream you get to
enjoy thousands of high-quality
documentaries by some of the best
filmmakers in the world from history to
science to nature curiosity streams
ever-expanding catalogue will let you
take a deeper dive into fascinating
topics get unlimited access to both
curiosity stream and support your
favorite creators on nebula all for just
$2.99 a month by going to curiosity
stream comm slash mustard and using the
promo code mustard when you sign up
[Music]